From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is the Daily.
>> What we're about to talk about [music]
next might be the most undercovered
story of human misery [music] on planet
Earth.
>> 20 years ago, a genocidal campaign in
the Darur region of Sudan shocked the
world. Now, videos and [music] images of
new atrocities have captured global
attention once more.
>> 150,000 people [music] have been killed.
Some 12 million displaced, half of them
children,
>> as another bloody conflict has returned
[music] to the region.
>> This week, the people of Alaser,
>> beaten and threatened, fled for their
lives from a murderous militia [music]
that films itself unleashing ferocious
violence.
>> Today, [music] my colleague Declan Walsh
on what has become the worst
humanitarian conflict in decades and the
precious [music] metal that is fueling
it.
It's Monday, [music] November 10th,
Declan. In recent weeks, there have been
many horrific images coming out of
Sudan, including what appear to be these
very graphic execution videos, and this
is all occurring as part of a civil war
that you've been covering since the
start. Tell me what has happened in
Darur over the past couple of weeks.
Well, after 18 months of a pretty brutal
siege led by this paramilitary group,
the Rapid Support Forces, which had been
trying to seize control of this city
called Alaser. It was the last major
urban center in western Sudan that was
beyond its control. It finally broke the
siege and its troops seized the entire
city. They expelled the Sudin military
from it. And what followed was really
days of reports of atrocities against
about a quarter million civilians who'd
been trapped inside the city.
>> First, we saw these videos start to come
out showing bodies piled in buildings,
sometimes fighters executing wounded
people lying on the ground, often quite
casually. These videos, it must be said,
are filmed by the fighters themselves as
kind of trophies for the war, which is a
pattern we've seen since the start of
the Sudan war. And since then, that's
been added to by accounts from
witnesses, from people who fled the
city, from aid groups, and now from
open-source investigators who are using
satellite images to try and determine
what's been happening in Alaser. And
just last week, a new report from one of
those groups saying that they had
uncovered evidence [snorts] that 80
people had been killed in one specific
incident. Others have found traces, in
fact, from satellites of blood on the
sands of the area around Elasir.
>> This is of course coming 20 years after
another bloody conflict made Darur
basically a byword for human rights
atrocities. Can you talk to us about
what is different this time?
That's right. I mean, 20 years ago,
Darur in fact became synonymous with the
word genocide. And that's because at
that time, there was an armed militia
called the Janjid that was leading a lot
of the killing in Darur, a conflict that
killed as many as 300,000 people. The
difference this time is that the Janjeed
has been replaced by another group
called the rapid support forces,
effectively its descendant. And [snorts]
that group is better armed than ever
before. In the past, the Jedi fought
with horses and camels. This [snorts]
time the rapid support forces have got
armored vehicles, extremely
sophisticated Chinese drones. Last time
the Janjid River were fighting alongside
Sudan's army. This time it's fighting
against the army. And its ambitions are
no longer limited to control of Darur.
It's part of this struggle for control
of the entire country. Since the war
started over two years ago, at least 12
million people have been forced from
their homes in Sudan. As many as 400,000
have been killed by some estimates. And
[snorts] about half the country is
facing acute hunger with many instances
of declared famine, mostly in the same
region of Darur. And that's part of this
civil war that's been raging in Sudan
for the last 2 and 1/2 years. And that
war has led to what is now widely
recognized as the world's largest
humanitarian crisis.
>> These numbers are obviously staggering.
You mentioned 400,000 people have been
killed and I want to talk about what is
driving this conflict which is something
that you have spent a lot of time trying
to report out and you're reporting one
of Pulitzer actually this year.
Tell us about what you have learned
about why this conflict has gotten so
bloody.
>> Well, when it started in April 2023, it
looked quite simply like a power
struggle between two rival generals at
the top of Sudan's security forces. But
very quickly that conflict spread from
the capital cartoon across the country
engulfing Africa's third largest
country. And you know the next logical
question that stemmed from that for me
was how are they all funding it
>> right?
>> So follow the money really became a
central part of our reporting
>> and in part that's what brought me to
the cartoon earlier this year at a very
dramatic moment just as the city was
changing hands.
>> And what did the capital look like at
that point after about I guess two years
of war? It was absolutely devastated.
You know, previously, just to paint you
a brief picture, this was a very proud
city on the Nile. This is a country that
had significant oil resources, deep gold
resources. It had a growing middle
class. And now much of the city had been
laid to waste.
entire neighborhoods of homes that had
been looted, buildings destroyed, and in
particular the city center around the
presidential palace. The presidential
palace had become one of its biggest
battlegrounds.
At one point, we climbed into a sniper
nest beside the Nile River and
overlooking that palace. And it was
amazing to see how it had been
absolutely reduced to rubble by the
fighting. And it wasn't just that. the
entire city center. Many tall buildings
were also pocked with bullet marks and
have been turned into fighting
positions. It was really incredible to
see how an entire city could be reduced
to rubble by this 2 years of war
largely, it must be said, without being
seen by the outside world.
>> As the Sudin military pushed into new
areas, we followed them.
and often came across residents who were
emerging from their homes kind of
stunned.
>> I was frightened and run away.
>> We talked to this one man who'd seen his
neighbor get gunned down by RSF
fighters.
>> He heard the shooting came out from his
house. He wanted to know what is
happening. Saw the militia of a man
shooted him. He was shooted by cold
blood. and others brought these stories
about abuse, about starvation, about
people being killed.
>> At one point, we found ourselves at a
well that contained maybe a dozen
bodies, and we were told that these were
people who had been killed by fighters
at a nearby checkpoint and dumped there.
>> What was it like to report in that kind
of environment? And what kind of clues
could you find to answer your question
about what is funding and fueling all of
this destruction?
Well, as we went through the city, we
found ourselves in the abandoned villas
of some of the RSF leaders. In one of
them in particular, there were fighters
lounging outside this empty swimming
pool. The house had an internal
elevator, you know, sort of markings of
wealth that were such a contrast with
the scenes we were seeing outside.
And so, as we walked through this house,
I also found this sheath of papers that
evidently had been abandoned by the Orus
leaders as they left. And when we
examine them more closely, they turned
out to be corporate documents related to
gold mines run by the same armed group
in the south of the country. And this
was a really important clue into what
was funding a lot of the fighting.
We already knew that, you know, Sudan
had a huge gold industry going back many
years, but it was very difficult to get
a sense of just how important it had
become to these groups that were
fighting for control and how much it was
fueling the fight itself. And here was
this clue that really set us further
along this track of trying to uncover
what's really driving this destructive
war in Sudan. It seems unusual that a
war could be boiled down to something as
simple as gold. It does remind me of the
blood diamonds that fuel the conflict in
Sierra Leone, but I'm curious if you see
it this way.
>> Well, look, you're absolutely right.
There is a strong parallel between the
issue of blood diamonds that were so
famous years ago from West Africa and
the importance of gold in this conflict.
But, you know, Sudan's war is about many
things. The fight between these two
generals exposed this much deeper rift
in the country. Tensions that go back to
the genocide 20 years ago in Sudan that
were never really healed. And now
they've become mixed with ethnic
problems, political problems, and
focused inside this war that has
engulfed the whole country. But on top
of that, this is a country with a lot of
rich agricultural land. It's got ports
on the Red Sea. It's a huge country. So
there are many reasons to fight over it,
but gold is the one thing that is easy
to mine in the middle of the conflict
and that now of course is worth so much
money. Gold prices are higher than
they've ever been.
>> Declan, can you talk a little bit about
the gold economy, how much it's worth,
if we have any idea how the gold
actually moves, and whose hands actually
touch it along the way?
Well, look, most of it is smuggled, so
we don't know exactly, but it certainly
by most estimates is worth billions of
dollars every year. [snorts] And it's a
huge factor on both sides of the war,
but particularly for the RSF. And the
leader of the group, his name is
Lieutenant General Muhammad Hamdan,
widely known as Hemet, is a commander
who in many ways came to prominence as a
result of gold. Back in 2017, his forces
seized one of the largest gold mines in
the country and that became a bedrock of
the expansion of his military forces but
also of this sort of business empire
that he built up that helped to make him
such a power broker in the country.
>> How has this general HeD managed to both
fight a war and mine for gold at the
same time? Like how does that operation
work exactly?
>> To be clear, his forces aren't mining
the gold themselves. He relies on this
enormous pool of people in Sudan who are
willing to work in really terrible
conditions to get the gold out of the
ground. Very little of it in his areas
are extracted through what you might
think of as a classic industrial mine
with lots of heavy machinery and so on.
What actually happens is you've got
thousands, sometimes tens of thousands
of people who are extracting this gold
in really rudimentary ways, hacking it
out of the ground, literally using
pickaxes, pulling the ore out of the
ground. I've seen it firsthand myself
when I visited some gold mining
operations in Sudan a few years ago. And
then they run it through this very
rudimentary process to sift it using
some pretty simple machines. Then they
use mercury to help separate out the
gold. That's extremely dangerous for
people's health obviously. And then
eventually that gold is processed into
sort of semi-pure bars. And then the
tailings or the waste from that is
further processed again and they extract
the rest of the gold from that. So
that's what's known as artisal gold
mining as opposed to industrial mining
which involves classically as we would
think of a large plant with you know
huge amounts of earth being moved
around. So in many ways the RSF and
General Hamdam have relied on the fact
that Sudan is such a poor country and
there are so many people who are
available to do this really tough work
to get that ore out of the ground and
process it into gold. [music]
Given what we know about how desperate
the situation has been in Sudan, how
poor people are, obviously there's been
a famine for many years, and how brutal
the RSF has been. Would you call it
forced labor? Is it slave labor?
>> No, I I would call it desperate labor.
These are people who are turning to gold
mining because frankly there's no other
source of income left. The war has
devastated the country's economy. uh
this is a country that has a lot of very
fertile land and had other sources of of
income. So you've seen these areas that
are now almost entirely controlled by
RSF fighters sometimes with a pretty
brutal regime over these gold mines, but
people are flocking to it from across
the region because that's the only way
they can get money to feed themselves or
their families. But it's important to
say that the RSF isn't doing this alone.
Before the war, it was working with
mercenaries from the Wagner Group.
That's the Russian private military
company that's become such powerful
force in this part of Africa.
>> That's very closely tied to the Kremlin,
right?
>> Yeah. Very closely tied to the Kremlin.
Um, now known in some other places as
Africa Corps, but in this part of the
world, they still call it Wagner. And so
Wagner was working with the RSF before
the war, helping to extract the gold
from some of these areas or to secure
the gold as they transported it out of
the country. A lot of it seems to have
ended up ultimately in Moscow. And in
the war itself, our reporting indicated
that Wagner or the Russian mercenaries
have continued to work with the RSF in
parts of Darur, particularly in this
extremely remote area called Songo,
where you've got dozens of these small
gold mines dotted around the terrain
where people are mining for gold, but
also there is a central location where
what they call the tailings, that's the
the the sort of the waste from the
initial pass on the gold is processed
and that provides an entirely new
process for extracting gold that is
almost entirely in the hands of the RSF
and their Russian partners.
>> So you've just laid out very
comprehensively one side of the
conflict. Tell us about how gold fuels
the other side of the conflict.
>> Sudan's military is also deeply
dependent on gold. It's a somewhat
different structure on the other side of
the country. Over there in the eastern
and northern Sudan, there are a handful
of these large industrial style mines
and in fact production of gold according
to the official figures has now ramped
up to the point where more gold is being
extracted over there than ever before
even during the relative peace before
the war started. So the military
controls or has a stake in several of
these huge mines and the military like
the OSF runs some of these mines in
association with foreign players
including some Russian business people.
>> So Russia in some ways is supporting and
potentially benefiting from both sides
of this conflict.
>> Correct.
>> Declan, you have both sides of this
conflict using gold to fund their war
efforts. Obviously any kind of commodity
needs a buyer. Who is purchasing all of
this gold?
>> Well, we found that nearly all of this
gold which has funded so much of the
fighting and created so much misery and
destruction in the country goes to a
single destination.
And that's a country that has a deep
interest in the war and could be the
solution to ending it.
[music]
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> Declan, you mentioned that all of this
gold is going to a single destination.
Where is it going and how did you report
that out?
>> It's really hard to trace gold. You
know, it can be melted down. It can be
mixed with gold from other places. it
doesn't have a sort of geological
signature in the same way as diamonds do
for instance. So I reached out to
contacts in countries all around Sudan.
We went through flight records, company
files in an effort to pull the thread of
one single shipment of gold that was
coming out of the war zone and ending up
in international markets. And that led
us to this instance of a single shipment
of about $25 million worth of gold that
was mined in Darur in the middle of the
war zone was smuggled out through South
Sudan neighboring country and that ended
up on this luxury jet which had been
chartered from an American company and
flown hundreds of miles across into the
Persian Gulf to the country of the
United Arab Emirates which as it turns
out is where 90% of smuggled gold from
the continent of Africa ends up and
nearly all of Sudin gold is traded as
well.
>> So okay, that's what it took to trace
just one shipment. How much money
overall are we talking about that's
flowing from Sudan to the UAE?
>> We are talking about billions of dollars
in gold. A lot of it is undeclared. So,
it's hard to know exactly how much, but
there was a study a few years ago by a
Swiss group which found that in the
decade from 2012 to 2022,
$15 billion worth of undeclared gold
from Africa had ended up in the UAE. And
certainly a decent proportion of that
would have come from Sudan. It's a part
of the UAE economy that often gets
obscured by the country's image which
tends to focus around its gleaming
skyscrapers or its place as a location
for reality TV shows or a certain amount
of glamour. But you know the truth is
that since the Emirates was a poor
country u seven or eight decades ago, it
has had this gold industry and that gold
industry has increased in leaps and
bounds in recent years. Um, and a lot of
the gold that is traded there comes from
Africa and most of that gold, like the
gold that comes from Sudan, is smuggled.
>> And what have the Emirates said about
their role in funding this conflict?
>> Well, the Emirates staunchly denies that
it supports either side in the conflict
and in fact says that its main goal in
Sudan is to work towards peace. But that
contrasts with what we found in our own
reporting and what's been said by
numerous other sources, including human
rights groups, uh, United Nations
investigators and even American
lawmakers who've had intelligence
briefings on this subject. And all of
that points to the Emirates supplying
weapons to the RSF. Our reporting even
showed that some of this smuggling has
taken place under the flag of one of the
most respected symbols in humanitarian
aid, the Red Cresant and the Red Cross.
And the Emirates have supplied drones,
they've supplied mercenaries to help the
RSF. And they've also given political
support to the group. Last year, Hemet,
the leader of the RSF, did a tour of
several African countries in which he
met prime ministers and presidents and
attempted to sort of burnish his image.
Um, and he did that on a Boeing jet
which had been supplied by the UAE. At
the same time, it turns out the Emirates
has an ownership stake in one of the
largest governmentcontrolled
industrialized gold mines in the
country. That's called the the Kush
mine. In other words, there's evidence
that the UAE is arming one side in the
war while funding the other.
>> So, the UAE is hedging its bets here. We
haven't talked about the United States
and any role that the US might have in
ending this war. So far, the US has been
deeply invested in ending the wars in
Ukraine and Gaza, but we have heard next
to nothing about anything that the US
intends to do visav Sudan. What has the
Trump administration said publicly about
this?
Well, if I can pedal back just briefly
to the previous administration, the
Biden administration, there has
certainly been a lot of US concern among
some officials at least about what's
going on in Sudan. The Biden
administration recognized that the
Emirates was a major factor in fueling
the war and privately put pressure on
the Emirates to try and stop that to
little effect. The Trump administration
initially didn't seem to be very
concerned with Sudan, but as things have
gotten worse in recent months,
particularly as the siege of the city
Alaser we talked about earlier
intensified, the Trump administration
has suddenly become much more engaged in
Sudan. Since September, we've seen the
US bring together this diplomatic
grouping which it calls the Quad and
that is diplomats from the US, from
Saudi Arabia, from the United Arab
Emirates and from Egypt. And they say
that they are working towards a
ceasefire in the country. It didn't lead
to much initially, but at least provides
a sort of framework for what it hopes
could at least stop the fighting and the
war for the first time in over 2 and 1/2
years. But given how much money is
flowing into the UAE in the form of gold
from Sudan and the fact that they won't
even acknowledge that they have a role
in the conflict, what incentive would
the UAE have in trying to solve this?
>> Well, this is part of the problem. I
mean, critics of this diplomatic
initiative say, "Here's the US trying to
bring peace to Sudan, but doing it
through these talks with countries that
are fueling either side in the war,
particularly the UAE." And in fact, even
when the UAE signed an agreement as part
of the Quad in September denouncing
foreign funding in the war, it was
continuing to support the RSF and didn't
seem to do anything to stop the terrible
scenes that we've seen in Alaser just
over the last couple of weeks. So, it's
really a very uncertain effort. But it
has to be said that as these images have
been coming out of Sudan showing these
atrocities,
it is generating outrage and attention
around the world. And in fact, I've even
heard recently from very senior American
officials that President Trump himself
hasn't spoken much about Sudan, but has
privately told officials how appalled he
was at some of the things he's been
seeing and asking what the United States
can do at this stage to try and stop it.
>> This war in Sudan started in 2023 and it
has gotten so much less attention than
the war in Gaza, which also started at
the end of 2023. And we may now be
talking about Sudan because there is a
ceasefire, a fragile ceasefire, but a
ceasefire nonetheless in Gaza. And I
wonder whether these two things are
related, that there is now room and
space and attention to devote to this
conflict in Sudan. Do you see it that
way?
I mean, look, one of the most striking
things about this war in Sudan is just
how little attention it's had, despite
the immense destruction and human
suffering that it has brought.
But what's [music] changed recently, I
think, is that we're seeing these images
coming out as there have been in Gaza
that captured people's [music]
imaginations because they are so
horrified with what they've been seeing.
But the question now is when those
[music] images do go away, whether
public attention or even global
attention will also Wayne and with
[snorts and music] it even the small
amount of momentum that exists now
towards finding a solution to the war.
[music]
>> Declan, thank you so much.
>> Thank you, Rachel.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
After a procedural vote Sunday night in
the US [music] Senate, the federal
government appears poised to end its
record-breaking shutdown. The deal saw a
handful of members of the Democratic
caucus [music] join Republican senators
to advance a package of bills that would
fund the government through January
30th.
In addition, the deal would fund
programs related to agriculture, [music]
military construction, and legislative
programs for nearly a year. It would
also require the government to rehire
federal workers who were laid [music]
off during the shutdown. The deal, which
Democratic leader Chuck Schumer did not
support, includes no guarantee on
extending [music] the health insurance
subsidies that have been at the center
of Democrats demands. The funding
package must now be fully debated
[music] and passed by the Senate and
approved by the House before the
government can reopen. [clears throat]
and two of the BBC's top officials
resigned [music] abruptly on Sunday
following a report suggesting that a
program made by the public service
broadcaster had misleadingly edited a
speech by President Trump. The
resignation of the officials, the
[music] BBC's director general and its
chief executive officer for BBC News
came several days after the Daily
Telegraph published details of a leaked
internal memo which argued that a
documentary the broadcaster aired
[music] had juxtaposed comments by the
president in a way that made it appear
he'd explicitly encouraged the January
[music] 6th capital riot.
Today's [music] episode was produced by
Mooj Zadei, Nina Feldman, and Sydney
Harper with help from Jessica [music]
Chung, and Ricky Netski. It was edited
by Michael Benois with help from Chris
Hel. [music]
Contains original music by Marian Lozano
and was engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
That's it for the daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.